add governance and switch to balancer amms (#194)
latent-to/developer-docs: docs/learn/roadmap.md

- [Proposal: On-Chain Governance System for Bittensor](https://hackmd.io/mHQ9sPiCRn-vyc7ZTKBfWw)

## Solving the MEV problem
  
Throughout Bittensor's history, Maximal Extractable Value (MEV) attackers have taken a significant toll on the Bittensor token economy, as is true for many blockchain token economies.

Maximal Extractable Value (MEV) occurs when network participants exploit transaction visibility in the mempool to profit from foreknowledge of pending transactions—enabling front-running, sandwich attacks, and other forms of parasitic extraction. MEV is a fundamental problem for Substrate/Polkadot-based chains, like Bittensor's Subtensor blockchain, as discussed in this recent Polkadot [forum thread](https://forum.polkadot.network/t/encrypted-mempools-turning-polkadots-mev-leak-into-treasury-revenue/15817).

Bittensor's [price protection mechanism](./price-protection) has offered stakers a strong degree of protection for some time, but using it correctly can be a dauntingly complex and laborious task for many users and requires the use of programmable clients (e.g. BTCLI or the Python SDK) rather than simpler trading apps.

> Bittensor's MEV Shield, introduced in December 2025, encrypts transaction details until block inclusion and provides easy, automated protection from MEV exploits. A number of follow-up optimizations and edge-case fixes are currently in research and development and are expected to roll out to main net in Spring 2026, providing a mature, comprehensive, and seamless-to-use solution to the MEV problem for Bittensor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Bittensor's MEV Shield, introduced in December 2025, encrypts transaction details until block inclusion and provides easy, automated protection from MEV exploits. A number of follow-up optimizations and edge-case fixes are currently in research and development and are expected to roll out to mainnet in Spring 2026, providing a mature, comprehensive, and seamless-to-use solution to the MEV problem for Bittensor.
```

Reviewer: We could specifically mention that it's an issue on/through EVM (not on the native chain itself)

See [MEV Shield: Encrypted Mempool Protection](../concepts/mev-shield/)

## Perfecting the Emissions Model
  

> Bittensor's Emissions algorithm, by which Bittensor rewards participants with ownership of tokens, is continually evolving. The research and development team and many contributors from the community are working hard to invent, mathematically explore, computationally simulate and rigorously crash test, the implications of possible variants of how Bittensor could distribute tokens. All of this is required in order to find the ideal protocol for the goals of Bittensor, to promote a Bittensor ecosystem that can excel both in producing better commodities and creating a fair environment for all participants.

Reviewer: It's not the participants that are being rewarded, it's the allocation of emissions to subnets (as the discussion is TAO emission, right?)
